---
layout: default
title: Notes on `The Idea Factory`
---
# Notes on `The Idea Factory`

All credit for these excerpts goes to Jon Gertner. You should read his book!

## What are today's models that select for ingenuity, cleverness, potential?
`It was curious, in a way, who they were, these men coming to Bell Labs in New York. Most had been trained at first-rate graduate schools like MIT and Chicago and Caltech; they had been flagged by physics or chemistry or engineering professors at these places and their names had been quietly passed along to Kelly or someone else at the Labs. But most had been raised in fly-speck towns, intersections of nowhere and nowhere...Almost all of them had found a way out — a high school teacher, oftentimes, who noticed something about them, a startling knack for mathematics, for example, or an insatiable curiosity about electricity, and had tried to nurture this talent with extra assignments or after-school tutoring, all in the hope (never explained to the young men but realized by them all, gratefully, many years later) that the students could be pushed toward a local university and away from the desolation of a life behind a plow or a cash register.`

From my limited point of view, the world is less credentialist. Credentials still matter but shipping code and doing something useful means a lot, and barriers to entry for that are as low as an Internet connection. I believe the closest parallel to Bell Labs is Google's research divisions, which need proof of PhD-equivalent work to join. Perhaps I'm too optimistic in looking for reduced credentialism today, though.
When I interviewed Prof. Kernighan of Princeton, previously with the Computing Science Research Center at Bell, he told me that they selected for ability to do the work above all else, which may have impacted diversity. Certainly this type of Midwestern scientist was common, but it became less so over the decades as science in general benefited from global brain drain.

## Designing to maximize coincidence
`"On the contrary, all buildings have been connected so as to avoid fixed geographical delineation between departments and to encourage free interchange and close contact among them." The physicists and chemists and mathematicians were not meant to avoid each other, in other words, and the research people were not meant to evade the development people. By intention, everyone would be in one another's way. Members of the technical staff would often have both laboratories and small offices — but these might be in different corridors, therefore making it necessary to walk between the two, and all but assuring a chance encounter or two with a colleague during the commute... Traveling [the physics building's main corridor] without encountering a number of acquaintances, problems, diversions, and ideas would be almost impossible. Then again, that was the point. Walking down that impossibly long tiled corridor, a scientist on his way to lunch in the Murray Hill cafeteria was like a magnet rolling past iron filings.`

Universities aren't built this way; departments are sequestered off from one another. For instance, the humanities departments are on the other side of a road from the social sciences and engineering departments at Princeton. Co-locating offices might help generate connections across disciplines? Certainly it also depends on how intelligible the disciplines are to one another as well.

`In truth, the handoff between the three departments at Bell Labs was often (and intentionally) quite casual. Part of what seemed to make the labs a "living organism", Kelly explained, were social and professional exchanges that moved back and fort, in all directions, between the pure researchers on one side and the applied engineers on the other. These were formal talks and informal chats, and they were always encouraged, both as a matter of policy and by the inventive design of the Murray Hill building.`

The three departments are research, systems engineering, and engineering, roughly corresponding to the process of discovery, development, and manufacture. Turns out Bell Labs also invented the discipline of systems engineering to administrate the Bell System and integrate in new discoveries! Obviously a "formal" division of the three requires enormous scale. In the modern technological ecosystem, discovery happens in universities and corporate labs while VCs/management/cofounders act as systems engineers, and companies usually manufacture and bring products to market. I don't know whether anyone anticipated this shift when the government broke up AT&T, but the trend might have been visible already in the 1990s.

## Bell Labs' political status
`Not long after the transistor's unveiling at the West Street auditorium, the Labs began to spread its new invention around. In later years, corporations would give calculated thought and effort to this process, which would become known as the *diffusion* of new technology. The executives at Bell Labs, however, were making things up as they went along. The top managers had already agreed that they were compelled to share and license the transistor device. The political logic — the appeasement of government regulators — was overwhelming. And an open-door policy had other advantages, too. Bell Labs' breakthrough burnished its reputation as a national resource. For those doubting that the monopoly granted to AT&T, its parent company, would result in any large-scale scientific and public benefits, here was contravening proof.`

Those executives were right — it's hard to think of a contemporary invention that's had close to the impact the transistor has. I'm fond of thinking as Bell Labs as a de facto national laboratory, as executives might have, given the obvious benefits of the Bell System. There's also a complex dynamic at play between government regulators, AT&T, and Bell Labs. The Labs and its benefits to American science and engineering are often deployed as a shield from anti-trust regulation. Given that modern Big Tech has been aggressively maneuvering against possible anti-trust suits, the government is very behind the curve on the contemporary cases. I don't think it's even considered a viable course of action in the public sphere.

`The Attorney General's office...seemed to be fighting to break up AT&T at the same time the Department of Defense was moving to capitalize on its broad expertise. If that was in fact true, then Wilson — and Kelly, too — realized they had some leverage. They could make AT&T indispensable in the affairs of government. Kelly had long been willing to do anything to preserve Bell Labs' existing structure, size, and influence. If he had to work even harder to do so, he would.`

And so Kelly went to work in Washington. Modern Big Tech does the same but wants to hide it from the public: just look at the Google protests and walkouts. Yasha Levine's *Surveillance Valley* goes into detail on this. What implicit bargains is, say, Amazon making to avoid anti-trust suits? My pessimistic guess is that lawyers don't know how to approach this. AT&T had obvious ways of being split; not so much for Big Tech.

## Seeing the future
`The telecommunications systems of the future would be "more like the biological systems of man's brain and nervous system." ... It seemed to be some kind of extended human network he had in mind, hazy and fantastical and technologically sophisticated, one where communications whipped about the globe effortlessly and where everyone was potentially in contact with everyone else. ... Kelly's confidence was almost certainly rooted in his early experiences. He remembered the endless days and nights constructing vacuum tubes in lower Manhattan, the countless problems in the beginning and then the stream of incremental improvements that improved the tubes' performance and durability to once-unimaginable levels. He could remember, too, that as the tubes became increasingly common — in the phone system, radios, televisions, automobiles, and the like — they had come down to price levels that once seemed impossible. He had long understood that innovation was a matter of economic imperatives. As Jack Morton had said, if you hadn't sold anything you hadn't innovated, and without an affordable price you could never sell anything. So Kelly looked at the transistor and saw the past, and the past was tubes. He thereby intuited the future.`

The Labs were driven by the problems of the Bell System and the joy of discovery, working for "something more than money", as Claude Shannon put it. In large part those problems were articulated by the various directors and presidents of the Labs that Gertner focuses his book on, men with the time and foresight to sometimes see the patterns of the future. I also love the idea of innovation needing to bring products to market. It's part of the linear model, sure, and there're a lot of good ideas that never took off because they didn't fit what people wanted, but deployment to users is the real crucible.

`Though Engel didn't perceive it at the time, he later came to believe that marketing studies could only tell you something about the demand for products that actually exist. Cellular phones were a product that people had to imagine might exist.`

Creating truly new products requires also creating the market for that product. In the best case, people will see the value you offer and switch. If not, well, time to iterate on what you've got.

## Claude Shannon
So much could be said about him. I'm planning to read `A Mind At Play: How Claude Shannon Invented The Information Age` by Jimmy Soni in the future, but here's just one quote about the man.

`Here, then, was a picture of Claude Shannon, circa 1955: a man — slender, agile, handsome, abstracted — who rarely showed up on time for work; who often played chess or fiddled with amusing machines all day; who frequently went down the halls juggling or pogoing; and who didn't seem to care, really, what anyone thought of him or his pursuits. He did what was interesting. He was categorized, still, as a scientist. But it seemed obvious that he had the temperament and sensibility of an artist.`

One of my personal models for his brilliance and creativity.

## Process knowledge
`An institute of creative technology needed to house its critical mass close to one another so they could exchange ideas; it also needed to give them all the tools they needed. Some of those tools took the form of expensive machinery or furnaces for the laboratories. Some of them were human, however. Bell Labs employed thousands of full-time technical assistants who could put the most dedicated graduate students to shame. Such assistants sometimes only had a high school diploma but were dextrous enough, mentally and physically, that PhDs would often speak of them with the same respect they gave their most acclaimed colleagues. "They were the keepers of practical information," John Rowell, an experimental physicist, recalls. "They knew secrets, tricks. And they knew all this lore about what had been done in the early days."`

Bell Labs didn't just retain the brightest theoretical scientists and engineers, they also had an enormous well of [process knowledge](https://danwang.co/how-technology-grows/) to draw from. Dan Wang, in the link, argues that we must consider that knowledge as it reinforces the tools and recipes for technology we develop. One line of inquiry is: where did all of this knowledge go? As the industries that Bell Labs created grew up, did the Labs' workforce disperse with it? Where are they now, and how far can you trace the lineage of employees?

## Patent concessions
`The government had hinted that in exchange for a fig leaf of compromise from AT&T, it was inclined to drop the suit and allow the company to maintain its monopoly. AT&T offered two fig leaves. The first was its agreement not to enter the computer or consumer electronics markets. The second concession, at least on its face, seemed far more dramatic: The phone company agreed to license its present and future U.S. patents to all American applicants, "with no limit as to time or the use to which they may be put."`

`In time, any company could code and send a message digitally, and any company could uncode it. And with transistors, which were increasingly cheap and essential to digital communication, the process would get easier by the year. Mathews argued that Shannon's theorem "was the mathematical basis for breaking up the Bell System."`

A turning point and probably the birth of the modern technology industries. It's not hard to imagine AT&T's monopoly power and advantages in research and development choking out these industries, despite a couple notable failures. These are the industries that will, given time, make superfluous AT&T's infrastructural advantage.

## John Pierce
`In the end, though, [Telstar] served as an almost perfect example of Pierce's contention that innovations tend to happen when the time is right. Indeed, Telstar was not one invention but rather a synchronous use of sixteen inventions patented at the Labs over the course of twenty-five years. "None of the inventions was made specifically for space purposes," the New York Times pointed out. On the other hand, only all of them together allowed for the deployment of an active space satellite.`

`In Baker's view, Pierce had helped create "usable and visible" technology. It wasn't theory, it was work that changed people's lives.`

## The Labs' future
`Drucker saw two possible roads ahead. On the one hand, Bell Labs could become a standard industrial lab, much like the ones that supplied technology to General Electric or RCA. Or the Labs could take a "far bolder, but far riskier course" by going into business for itself, making money from its patents and products. It could become a kind of unique and monolithic brain trust, one that did research for AT&T but also for any company or part of the government that was willing to pay for access to its people and resources. "Nothing like this has ever been done," Drucker noted. "And no one knows whether it would succeed."`

A think tank for creative technology. From talking with Prof. Kernighan, it seems that the first time AT&T split in the 1980s, not much changed culturally at the Labs. By the time the second split came, management had become much more industry-focused at the expense of the basic research mission. As the researchers of the second culture went their own ways, the Labs changed forever.
