---
layout: default
title: Books I Read In 2018
---
# Books I Read In 2018

- Kelly Cordes, `The Tower`
A brilliant portrait of Patagonian climbing, focusing on the controversy around Cerro Torre's first ascent. Cordes' quest for the truth reads like the best investigative journalism, and his cultivated knowledge of the region and its climbers shines.

- Viet Thanh Nguyen, `The Sympathizer`
Tense all the way through! It made me reflect on the sacrifices my parents made to bring me here, to America, of living in the contradictions of two cultures and two minds. I feel like a natural-born spook sometimes, too.

- Yasha Levine, `Surveillance Valley`
Really sticks a pin in the hopes of the Californian ideology. I wonder now, to what extent can the Internet and the good it's done in this world be separated from its origins? The cycle started at centralization under ARPA, swung out (or did it?) in the Net's early days, and seems to be returning again.

- Marcus Aurelius, `Meditations`, tr. Gregory Hays
Still a classic. Still gradually learning to balance self-acceptance with ambition.

- George Dyson, `Turing's Cathedral: The Origins of the Digital Universe`
Soporific at points, but no one's written a better love letter to Princeton. You can't believe the talent they had back then, and it's amazing how their entire enterprise has grown since then.

- Nicholas Warr, `Phase Line Green: The Battle for Hue, 1968`
Heartwrenching. I hope Warr found some peace.

- James D. Hornfischer, `The Last Stand of the Tin Can Sailors`
Honestly, read the Wikipedia article about the [Battle off Samar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_off_Samar) instead; you'll probably get just as much out of it. Kinda soporific.

- Peter Watts, `Blindsight`, short stories
I really, really liked [Collateral](http://www.lightspeedmagazine.com/fiction/collateral/). Mil-SF is just my thing, and I should look into his treatment of ethics because it's terrifying. `Blindsight` was also fantastic, I've never read hard SF quite as clever or cybernetic.

- Tracy Kidder, `The Soul of A New Machine`
This one's secretly a work of organizational sociology, but extremely well-told. How do you get an engineering team to build something complex and give them the space (from management) they need to succeed? Kidder's not writing about computer engineering so much as he's discussing an entire work process, at multiple complexity levels. His characterizations are also top-notch.

- Jon Gertner, `The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of American Innovation`
Same thing, bigger organization. Big companies used to be innovative - imagine that! I enjoyed following people through their careers at the Labs and seeing the projects they tackled. Learning about how the Labs designed their entire existence around giving researchers both the freedom and the problems necessary to make fundamental breakthroughs was a treat as well. The one huge omission (that Gertner notes, admittedly) is the lack of treatment of the Computing Sciences Research Center. Hopefully I can contribute to rectifying that in the future!

- Derek Yu, `Spelunky`
A great book on the birth and rebirth of a great indie game. I like that he writes across the entire development process, from his start in games through entire dev cycles, and includes the community in the book. It's got a lot of insight on generating creativity as well. Hint: work across genres :)

- C. P. Snow, `The Two Cultures`
A quite influential lecture, but the divide is still there and growing. It seems that in the fifty-odd years since this book's writing, complexity in both cultures has only increased. However, a set of basic skills - literary critical thinking, statistics, mathematics, introductory computer science - can help bridge the gap.
